Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we are going to focus on a loop cuts and slide and that's going to enable us to slice
through our model and add extra geometry.
That's going to be incredibly useful as we can see on our model here we've got a little entrance way
at the top here we can modify that later to have more detail in it but more importantly we've got an
area here that we can now start using to create some steps.
Now we're going to have some smaller steps running up and down here but the first thing to do of course
is to chop the entire thing in half like that in two specific places so that we can start modelling those
stairs later on.
Let's find out more and hop on over into the blender.
Okay so we've got our default cube in front of us and we'll work with the default cube initially and
then we'll explore a couple of other shapes as well to see the impact of loop cutting and where it will
work and where it will not work.
So in front of us here is the default cube we go into edit mode because we're going to be editing, now
loop cutting you can find that if you scroll down it's here loop cuts and if I hover over its control
and R is the shortcut key I tend to use control and R when I do that you get this yellow line that
comes along and shows you exactly where that new geometry where we're going to slice through our model.
Now what I can do is I can click straight away and then it gives me the option to slide backwards and
forwards.
And if you've inadvertently moved and you do want it directly in the middle you can either press 0
to lock it to zero or you can press escape and it will cancel the sliding that you were doing but it
won't stop the cuts that's already been done.
If we open up the loop cuts and slide we see that we've got a couple of options in the operator panel.
We can actually increase the number of cuts that are there pretty useful.
And we can change some of the other options in it as well.
I'm going to do that for the moment though we just want to work on our simple cuts.
Now if I press control and R again you can see that we can still cut it in various places and we can
even bisect the cuts that we've already done.
Now if I pick another area and instead of clicking just use my scroll wheel you can see I can increase
the number of cuts straight away.
And there we go.
And if I did that once more along our cube we get ourselves it's divided into subsections pretty
awesome.
And you can see here I've got five one side and four on all the rest I intended to get five sorry four
and well I missed it anyway you can see how I divided up the previous cube when we were discussing normals
so those are the basics of how to use a loop cuts to slice up your object that question is why would
you want to do that and what is it about loops.
Well with loops it enables you to edit your model incredibly quickly because it enables a path of geometry
around your model and as your models get more complex the topology how a model is put together with
its vertices edges and faces becomes more and more critical what you do want is is much geometry as
is necessary to represent the shape you want but not so much that it becomes a bit of a pain in the
backside and there are often modifiers that will do what you want to do without adding extra unnecessary
geometry let's get rid of the cube that we've just done and this time have a look at a UV sphere and
if we go into edit mode we see that it has a series of loop cuts essentially already going round it
so we have a band going around the objects which are called rings when you go ahead and add a UV sphere
so they've already been cut in and if I go ahead and just clear the selection with either alt and a
or a double tap of the A I can then hold down control an R and we can see that we get the additional
loops that we're used to but haven't noticed there as we get a vertical cut it doesn't go all the way
around our model whereas the ones going around our model do actually continue all the way around and
it does this because blender doesn't know how you want to cut that.
Now intuitively you would you probably say you and I let's just press escape so we can go and look down
on our model pressure control and R again you probably say well we needed to just continue over the
other way but the top of this sphere is a vertex and all of these current segments all meet at that
one point blender simply does not know which way to continue because it does not know your intentions
and it can't guess.
So it just doesn't do so we just end up with it cut in half there and if we wanted the other half we
would have to find the appropriate location and do so but if we zoom in even further you'll see that
this face that's highlighted and this face here don't have a cut in them as we would expect and that
is something to watch out with more complex models and we'll talk about how we can mitigate this problem
later on in the course when we get some more complex models because there are ways that you can have
a sphere like this and still be able to loop cut all the way around.
Now before I go and give you your challenge I'm going to add in a cube again go into edit mode and talk
about the loop cutting again because on certain shapes it can be very difficult to end up cutting evenly
about a central place and that's about and that is what we're about to do.
So in this cube for instance I can put in two cuts like so.
However on our pyramid we're going to have a slightly different type of cuts and we don't want it flaring
out at the bottom which will happen on our pyramid.
So in order to really replicate that Let's undo it and just scale in the top here.
Now when we go ahead and add two loop cuts you can see that the top parts of it in the bottom parts
it flares out.
And we want two dead parallel lines going down.
That is not easy to achieve by fiddling about with the settings we could try.
Even we could try flipped to you know you can you can try and adjust these to your heart's content and
you just won't get there.
Now if you recall in the insetting lecture I was talking about placing geometry temporarily on top
of other geometry and that can be incredibly useful for this particular instance.
So this is a work around thinking about our model.
So if I clear down that loop cut and add a loop cut but do nothing to it and then I can add another
loop cut and but it right up against the other one.
This now gives us two loop cuts that we can go G and Y and move them a set distance apart from one another
and they're still dead straight and parallel.
Very useful for getting those straight deadlines when we have a model that has an uneven top and bottom
to it.
And one final thing before we get onto the challenge here and when you've got to on top of each other
like this we're going to have to go G and X to move them apart.
If it ends up horrible and hashed like that you're actually pushing geometry inside itself.
You'll want to avoid doing that.
So let's pull this back out this way and of course we can type in a number there negative number of
possible here it's going to be about point five to pull it in to a negative place.
Now you may go around your model then selecting by holding down shift all of these other edges and then
moving it the great thing about having a loop cut is you can select all of the edges within that loop
by holding down Alt first and then clicking on the edge.
Super useful and it's going to be pretty necessary.
I don't fancy clicking all of the edges around the pyramid.
That would take quite a while.
So now we've covered that.
It's time for your challenge
Okay so your challenge is using loop cuts.
Place two cuts on the Mayan pyramid.
Ensure that those cuts are parallel and place them one meter.
Either side of the central point of the pyramid creating two cuts.
That are two meters apart and I'll just refresh your memory on what that's going to look like now.
Okay so by the end of the challenge you will have two parallel cuts running through your pyramid.
We can see that all the way around.
And if I look at it from the side dead on we can see that it's exactly two meters wide at the bottom.
So go ahead pause a video now and give that a g.o Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and create our parallel cuts on our pyramid.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
So we've got our pyramid here.
This is going to be very straightforward to create these cut so I'll go ahead and do it straight away.
So control and R, now is very tempting as I said before to just scroll up and add two cuts in that's
not going to work so we're going to keep it as one I'm going to loop cuts again and then push it all
the way up against as we did with the cube.
Now that I've done I need to move around to the appropriate side which in this case is the right.
Now if you have happened to put your cuts down front to back that does not matter at all in this case
I'm going to be locking to the Y axis.
Now I'm going to press G and Y to move this about and we can see that we get this horrible hashing.
Now that's me pushing the model inside itself.
We don't want to do that.
So I'm going to have to move this one in a negative direction so I'm going to go minus one.
And there we go.
This other one I'm going to go ahead and select and you can select a loop that you've made by holding
down alt and clicking on it.
Now that you've done that go G T and one and there we go.
We have moved everything so we've got two meters we've cut the entire thing in half and we're all done.
Brilliant.
How did you guys get on.
Hope your pyramids are coming along really well going to start adding some extra details to it soon
which is really going to flesh it out and make it look more convincing and I will see you all in the
next lecture.